"predix" "osisoft"

http://blogs.wsj.com/cio/2014/11/10/using-the-industrial-internet-of-things-to-drive-revenue-growth/

http://newsroom.cisco.com/press-release-content?articleId=1667560

http://bostoncommons.net/

https://www.accenture.com/us-en/_acnmedia/Accenture/next-gen/reassembling-industry/pdf/Accenture-Driving-Unconventional-Growth-through-IIoT.pdf

"IOT" "cloud"
http://www.salesforce.com/iot-cloud/

https://aws.amazon.com/iot/

https://cloud.google.com/solutions/iot/
https://cloud.oracle.com/iot

https://internetofthings.ibmcloud.com/

https://cloudplugs.com/

https://www.carriots.com/

http://www.ptc.com/axeda

Intel
Microsoft

https://thingspeak.com/

http://www.iotleague.com/list-of-10-iot-frameworks-and-platforms/
The Internet of Things (IoT) refers to smart machine-to-machine (M2M) interconnection technology enabled by secure connectivity and appropriate infrastructure, to reliably transform data into useful information for people, businesses, and institutions with appropriate analytics. The appropriate infrastructure could be a hybrid compute and store mechanisms like cloud stack and BigData technologies.
 Lots of IoT frameworks and/or platforms with different enterprise offerings and alliances have come up recently to increase the connectivity of devices into private and/or public networks/cloud. Key to a successful IoT implementation is the interoperability among various devices, robust IoT Frameworks and platforms that enable the same with a powerful analytics that enable applications to be built on top of it. Additionally these platform also need to provide value added services that increase the attractiveness for adoption of their solutions in enterprises.
 This is an effort to capture details of various platforms that enable IoT and the standards efforts to increase interoperability among the devices.

IoT Frameworks And Platforms: 
 Basic components of IoT Value Chain as highlighted below in Figure 1 are part of the offerings that are provided by various players in this space. Due to the evolution of these platforms the composition of features offered varies and over period of time may converge into these architectural blocks.

Figure 1: IoT Value Chain 
Figure 1: IoT Value Chain

IoT platforms evolved from two different directions. Those providing Devices and their connectivity solutions in private networks moved to the internet/public cloud. Other approach was the cloud provider’s added IoT protocols and application support to enhance the reach of their platform to multiple industries. Here below are the different framework and platform providers that are prevalent in the industry.
IoT Providers With Cloud Connectivity: 

RTI: RTI is one of the oldest and pioneer Internet of Things Platform provider, they claim to be the Most Influential Industrial IoT Company.

RTI
Figure 2 – RTI Connext DDS Architecture

Connext DDS is specifically designed for intelligent machines and their related cyber-physical systems. Unlike messaging middleware designed primarily for IT systems, Connext DDS does not require message brokers, directory services, servers or administration. The core messaging infrastructure is wholly contained in libraries linked into your applications. Connext DDS can provide a unified message bus across Operational Technology (OT) systems deployed at the edge and IT systems deployed in a data center or cloud. It also integrates easily with an existing enterprise messaging systems or Enterprise Service Bus (ESB).
 Market Addressed includes Aerospace, Energy, Transport, Industrial equipment and factories, Medical devices, Trading and Betting, Unmanned vehicles etc. FastTrax program helps in adopting their platform to the customer needs.

ThingWorx: ThingWorx is one of the earliest IoT software platform designed to build and run the applications of smart, connected products.

thingworkx
Figure 3 – ThingWorx platform architecture

Platform contains tools to perform end-to-end application modeling, create user interfaces with mashups, event driven execution engine, device (thing) management, intelligence tools etc.
 Market Addressed includes Aerospace, Automotive, Consumer products, Electronics and HighTech, Industrial equipment, Medical devices, Smart cities and all other Smart initiatives.

Cisco: Cisco offers new ways to manage and store data in the cloud and data center. Cisco offers products, services consulting, and industry-specific solutions that can improve productivity and efficiency in manufacturing, mining, oil and gas, transportation, and utilities.
 Cisco IoT Cloud Connect components are offered in multiple packages, giving greater flexibility for a more successful service offering as shown in Figure below

cisco
Figure 4 Cisco Cloud Connect Platform

Industry’s most complete, fully virtualized packet core, the new Cisco Virtualized Packet Core solution redefines agility for service providers and offers ways to capture untapped revenue opportunities, particularly with the proliferation of Internet of Everything (IoE) and M2M connections. The Cisco Virtualized Packet Core solution combines all packet core services – for 4G, 3G, 2G, Wi-Fi, and small cell networks – into a single solution. Since these services are virtualized, they can scale capacity and introduce new services much more quickly and cost effectively.

SalesForce: SalesForce
 Powered by Thunder, IoT Cloud connects all your data from the Internet of Things to the rest of Salesforce for better insights and real-time customer actions.

Figure 5 SalesForce IoT
Figure 5 SalesForce IoT

Salesforce Thunder is the world’s most scalable event processing engine designed to ingest and orchestrate billions of events from the connected world in real time. Thunder enables businesses to unlock insights that were previously invisible and allows anyone to take proactive, personalized actions from any device to get closer than ever to customers.
 Market addressed is similar to all enterprises using SalesForce today.

GE Predix: GE Predix Aims to be your cloud platform for the Industrial Internet. Initiated by General Electric, Predix platform aims to connect industrial assets to the cloud and to each other for asset performance management, operations optimization, and better profitability.

ge predix
Figure 6 GE Predix platform

GE wants this platform to be utilized in various industries where it can provide algorithms that can be readily utilized with monetization from it and provide a community platform for developers in other industries to develop algorithms for monetization purposes.

CLOUD PROVIDERS OFFERING IOT CONNECTIVITY: 

IBM BlueMix: IBM BlueMix is an open standards, cloud platform for building, running, and managing apps and services.
 BlueMix provides a single development and management experience across any combination of public, dedicated, and local BlueMix instances. It allows choosing where apps, data, and other services can live without compromising on the speed and economics of the cloud.

Figure 7 IBM Bluemix Deployment options
Figure 7 IBM Bluemix Deployment options

Bluemix tools help securely connect to different environments, transform and synchronize data, and create and expose enterprise APIs to the BlueMix catalogue. It provides development teams of all sizes with the flexibility to scale compute power at a very granular level, seamlessly collaborate on source code and shared APIs, and manage apps’ performance, logs and costs from a single dashboard.

AWS IoT: AWS IoT
 AWS IoT is a platform that enables you to connect devices to AWS Services and other devices, secure data and interactions, process and act upon device data, and enable applications to interact with devices even when they are offline.

Figure 8 Amazon AWS IoT
Figure 8 Amazon AWS IoT

They provide SDK that can enable writing applications that connect devices all the way up to hosting the data and writing applications that can utilize the data for workflow and analytics.

Azure IoT: Azure IoT Suite is an offering from Microsoft designed to get customers started quickly and realize business value from IoT. It can be up and running with a fully functional pre-configured solution in a matter of minutes and can provide a set of ‘virtual devices’ that run in the cloud to visualize the entire solution working end to end without having to connect a physical device!. Azure IoT Suite also takes care of the tasks of deploying and orchestrating the various services to give a complete end to end solution. Azure IoT device SDK, is an open source set of client libraries that run on a variety of operating systems and devices. SDK also provides step by step guidance and sample code that makes it easy to build prototypes with real devices that interact with the Azure IoT Suite.
 With the Microsoft Azure IoT Suite, one can monitor assets to improve efficiencies, drive operational performance to enable innovation, and employ advance data analytics to transform company with new business models and revenue streams.

Figure 9 Microsoft Azure IoT
Figure 9 Microsoft Azure IoT

Azure IoT Suite also offers specific industry vertical solutions for Energy, Transportation, Smart cities, Manufacturing and Healthcare.

OpenSensors: OpenSensors is an Internet of Things company providing public and private infrastructure for real-time data. They aim to make it easy for people to connect, deploy and remotely manage large deployments of sensors and internet-connected devices in the field at scale and easy to create smart products. They also provide the means to subscribe to and reuse publicly available real time data. From PCs to Raspberry Pis, Android to Electric Imp, platform is completely hardware agnostic. Anyone can connect one or many devices and publish Open Data through OpenSensors for free using the messaging broker. Open Data is publicly accessible, shareable and reusable by and for anyone. Anyone can search for public data easily such as earthquake, transport and air quality. Users can also choose to keep their data private for monthly paid subscriptions. It is backed by ‘Open Data Institute’ whose founders are Sirs Tim Berners-Lee (Inventor of the World Wide Web) and Nigel Shadbolt (Researches in intelligent behavior that is embodied and emerges in humans, machines and on the Web). ODI is an independent, non-profit, non-partisan, and limited by Guarantee Company. They have large mindshare in the smart cities, Agriculture, Nutrition and other projects in UK and other parts of world.

Verizon ThingSpace: Verizon ThingSpace is the latest entrant in the IoT landscape. Verizon Connectivity Management API allows to add and activate devices, check their status, monitor their usage, and perform other device connectivity management tasks through a REST API. The API can be used to add connectivity management to anything from small apps to enterprise software systems, such as enterprise resource planning (ERP), supply chain management and customer service management. The API provides a secure, standards-compliant REST interface to the web services at the Verizon M2M Data Center.

Verizon

ThingSpace platform tracks the entire life cycle of devices that are connected to the platform. It also provides simulator to test the device API’s and once the application is developed credentials can be changed to point to actual devices and get them involved in the platform.

http://www.cio.com/article/3017403/internet-of-things/welcome-to-the-enterprise-of-things-an-analysis-of-enterprise-iot-in-2016.html

It was an interesting year for the enterprise IoT space in 2015 and 2016 promises to be even better. In 2015 we witnessed the launch of brand new IoT platforms by major software vendors and startups as well as an increasing activity of consolidation and M&A in the space. As a result, 2016 should bring us a lot of activity in enterprise IoT initiatives. This article presents a taxonomy of the enterprise IoT market in 2016 that will help organizations evaluating this type of solutions and platforms. 


  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 

   


























reCAPTCHA challenge image Get a new challengeGet an audio challengeGet a visual challengeHelp  


  























CIO | Dec 22, 2015 5:06 AM PT  
Like this article? thumbsup 0 thumbsdown  



 


	
RELATED TOPICS Internet of Things
 Cloud Computing
 IT Strategy
 




Comments
   

 




How will the enterprise Internet of Things (IoT) market in 2016 help enterprises evaluate IoT solutions? Let’s start by taking a look at some of the key developments of enterprise IoT in 2015.




Hot stuff 
10 hottest tech skills for 2016 

Gunning for a banner year in IT? Make sure you have these skills in your toolbox. 

Read Now

Key developments of enterprise IoT in 2015

2015 was an incredibly active year for IoT in the enterprise. The emergence of new platforms and solutions, the decline of others and the increase of M&A activity dominated the headlines of 2015. In general, 2015 can be seen as a year in which the enterprise community have come to accept IoT as one of the trends that will be pivotal in the next decade of enterprise software. Trying to summarize the enterprise IoT space in 2015 in five points is not easy, but here are some of the key developments in the space.

Big PaaS embrace IoT

2015 saw big platform as a service (PaaS) providers like Microsoft Azure, AWS, Salesforce, and IBM launch new IoT platforms. While PaaS solutions have included IoT services for a while, they didn’t have complete IoT platform offerings. This changed completely in 2015, Salesforce announced its IoT Cloud solution at Dreamforce, Microsoft released Azure IoT Suite, and Amazon also announced its AWS IoT solution. More recently, IBM expanded its IoT Foundation with cognitive services powered by IBM Watson.



All these releases are very effective attempts to compact the enterprise IoT space, as the aforementioned PaaS solutions can leverage their mainstream distribution within enterprise customers. Additionally, the entrance of PaaS vendors in the IoT space is going to make it more challenging for new startups to gain mainstream market share in an increasingly competitive market.

GE is all in

Not trying to highlight a single vendor, but the commitment and performance of GE’s industrial IoT solution is rather impressive and a strong validation of the space. Based on statements from a few months ago, GE was predicting that its Predix IoT platform will generate over $5B in 2015. Those revenue multiples are significantly larger than any other players in the space.

From an enterprise perspective, GE commitment of the IoT space represents an important step bringing industrial solutions to the digital age. Predix is certainly a robust platform from the feature standpoint and it includes many industry-specific capabilities that are not present in mainstream IoT offerings.




IoT security hero image



internet of things 2015



Internet of Things IoT stock










 
The Future of Process 
 

BrandPost  Sponsored by K2  

The Future of Process 

As we gain access to more content and context, we ’ ve created a need for greater analysis of that data. Like so much software in the enterprise has evolved, the future of BPM and process will be a far cry from the...


Enterprise IoT startups are emerging everywhere

2015 saw the emergence of a large number of IoT startups in the enterprise space. Like many other fast growing enterprise trends, new startups are trying to capture meaningful market share in the IoT space. From isolated infrastructure services to complete platforms, the enterprise IoT startup ecosystem includes all aspects of enterprise IoT solutions.






The rise of the number of startups targeting enterprise IoT scenarios is driving a lot of innovation in the space and forcing the big enterprise platform vendors to keep innovating. However, the amount of new offerings have crowded the enterprise IoT space making it highly difficult for enterprises to select technologies to power their IoT solutions.

Active M&A environment

2015 was a very active year in terms of mergers and acquisitions in the enterprise IoT space. Some reports claim over $1.2B deployed in M&A activity related to enterprise IoT solutions. Citrix acquiring Octoblu, and Amazon acquiring 2lemetry are some of the key examples of M&A activity in the enterprise IoT system. As the enterprise IoT ecosystem continues to evolve, we should expect to see an increase in the M&A activity as well.

Evaluating enterprise IoT solutions in 2016: A market taxonomy

As enterprises start their IoT efforts in 2016 they will be faced with an overwhelming number of options for technologies and platforms. However, there are 5 main categories that effectively covered most of the enterprise IoT technologies in the space and can help enterprises in their evaluation of enterprise IoT technologies.

PaaS IoT platforms

As mentioned in a previous section, the incumbent PaaS vendors currently include complete IoT platforms as part of their offerings. This model allows enterprises to build IoT solutions that not only leverage IoT specific services, such as device management or stream analytics, but also take advantage of infrastructure services included in PaaS solutions. When evaluating IoT PaaS solutions, enterprises should consider the following elements:



Resources A


 
White Paper

Achieving Prolific Productivity with SAAS 



 
White Paper

Affordable, Scalable, Reliable OLTP in a Cloud and Big Data World 


See All 

    Go 
•Strengths: IoT PaaS offerings are a very attractive solution for enterprises which are already leveraging PaaS solutions such as AWS, Azure, Bluemix, Salesforce.com, etc. The combination of IoT specific with infrastructure and platform services enables the implementation of very sophisticated IoT solutions using a single technology stack.
•Weaknesses: As any general purpose solution, PaaS IoT platforms are not likely to include vertical-specific capabilities or even distribution models that are relevant to specific industries. Additionally, the fact that these platforms work exclusively in a public or hybrid cloud model can still be considered a challenge in many industries.
•Some Relevant Examples: AWS IoT, Azure IoT Suite, Salesforce IoT Cloud and IBM IoT Foundation are some of the PaaS IoT platforms that could be relevant to enterprises in 2016.

Standalone IoT platforms

This category includes some of the early IoT platforms in the space which focus on providing backend and infrastructure capabilities to enterprise IoT solutions. Differently from the PaaS IoT group, these solutions are commercialized as independent IoT platforms with no defined dependencies on any PaaS solution. When evaluating this type of IoT solution, enterprises should consider the following elements:
•Strengths: As early IoT platforms in the space, this group has managed to be relevant within the early adopters of enterprise IoT solutions. From this perspective, these types of platforms typically include many relevant use cases or even industry specific capabilities derived from their experience in real world implementations.
•Weaknesses: Compared to the IoT PaaS solutions, standalone IoT platforms can seem more limited as they don’t include general purpose services which can be relevant in enterprise IoT solutions. Additionally, these types of platforms typically require a decent amount of professional services as they still haven’t built sizable communities of developer or solution implementers.
•Some Relevant Vendors: Xively, ThingWorx and Jasper are some examples of standalone IoT platforms that should be relevant in the enterprise in 2016.



Popular On CIO.comA
pcw browsers primary 

The best Web browser of 2015: Firefox, Chrome, Edge, IE, and Opera compared

galaxy s6 edge plus iphone 6s plus 

6 things iPhone 6s Plus does that Galaxy S6 edge+ can't

football turf 

The Internet of Things comes to the NFL


IoT infrastructure services

Security, stream messaging, and device management are some of the examples of infrastructure capabilities that are key to enterprise IoT solutions. Very often, enterprises don’t require a complete IoT platform, but rather need a specific service that enables a handful of capabilities in a very effective way. This role has been fulfilled by IoT infrastructure service solutions that focus on enabling a single, or a small number of, related infrastructure services in IoT solutions. When evaluating IoT infrastructure services, enterprises should consider the following factors:
•Strengths: IoT infrastructure services are typically very specialized in the capabilities they provide including a large number of edge cases that are hard to find in general IoT platforms. Additionally, these offerings typically provide very robust and yet simple developer and DevOps experience, simplifying the experience for enterprises adopting these IoT capabilities.
•Weaknesses: Many times a single capability product becomes a feature or a larger solution. From this perspective, enterprises can find it challenging to justify an investment in a single IoT infrastructure service solution when they can acquire more complete IoT platforms. The interoperability with other IoT platforms should also be taken into consideration when evaluating this type of IoT service, as they will likely be a component of a much broader solution.
•Some Relevant Examples: PubNub, Mocana and Robomq are some relevant providers of standalone IoT capabilities.

IoT apps or vertical solutions

Like any other relevant enterprise software trend, IoT will produce a number of industry-specific solutions that can become successful by themselves. As a matter of fact, we are already seeing some of the big industrial players trying to address mainstream IoT scenarios like asset management, vehicle telemetry, smart energy consumption, etc., with specific IoT hardware-software solutions. When evaluating IoT vertical solutions, enterprises should consider some of the following factors:





•Strengths: Industry-specific IoT solutions avoid many of the frictions related with the adoption of IoT solutions in the enterprise. Also, this type of solution enables many vertical specific capabilities and use cases not present in general-purpose IoT platforms, and can be really hard to build from the ground up.
•Weaknesses: Like any other vertical solutions, enterprise IoT industry applications can be very challenging to modify and extend. The interoperability with other technologies often poses a challenge when adopting this type of solution.
•Some Relevant Examples: GE Asset Performance Management, Intel’s In-Vehicle Solutions and Cisco’s Connected Factory are some of the relevant examples of industry-specific IoT solutions.

IoT data services

Data, not hardware, is the crown jewel of enterprise IoT. Processing, analyzing, and taking action based on the high volumes of data produced in an IoT infrastructure are the ultimate value drivers of enterprise IoT solutions. As a result, enterprise IoT solutions typically include data processing and analytic capabilities in areas such as stream data processing, real time analytics, etc. When evaluating IoT Data Services, enterprises should consider the following factors:
•Strengths: IoT data services can be very effective when enabling stream processing and real time analytic capabilities. These technologies are typically optimized to work with a large number of endpoints generating large volumes of data. They can also integrate with mainstream analytic and big data platforms simplifying the adoption curve in the enterprise.
•Weaknesses: IoT data services can be difficult to implement in enterprise scenarios. This challenge is even bigger if we are talking about technologies that are not part of mainstream big data or analytics suite.
•Some Relevant Examples: Apache Storm, Spark Streaming, AWS Kinesis and Azure Stream Analytics.

Will IoT go mainstream in 2016?

I believe 2016 won’t be the year that starts the mainstream adoption of IoT technologies in the enterprise. The market remains incredibly crowded and most enterprises still haven’t developed the necessary level of knowledge and awareness of enterprise IoT solutions to become adopters. However, we think that in 2016 IoT will establish itself as a foundational piece of the next generation of enterprise software solutions. Additionally, I think the market will experience a decent level of consolidation, and this will clearly identify front-runners from second places.


http://digibe.io/








